.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

FFTrace freifunk-traceroute
===========================

**"fftrace"** is a console-based olsr-route-link-quality monitor

Problem description: in OLSR mesh networks routing is very dynamic. Fine
tools as traceroute give only a one-time impression, and mtr does not
cope with routechanges as often as they happen. Both aim to measure and
show the round trip times of packets as quality indicator. A wireless
network consists of many diffrent-quality HF-connections, some with
severe packet loss and some with less. The link-quality implementation
of olsrd introduced a value do describe the quality of these
connections. A tool to monitor the current route and the link-quality of
its connections was missing.

**"fftrace"** aims to fill this gap. It lists the single nodes of a
route and displays the quality of the connections in between. Finally it
shows the needed effort to get a packet through the whole route.

The program uses ttl-manipulatet icmp-echo-requests to find the
intermediate nodes and reads the udp-messages used and generated by the
olsr-deamons to gather present information about the link-quality and
neighbor-link-quality of node-node-pairs in the watched route. Due to
this structure there is no instant information on a new node-node-pair.
Until the information is available it is left blank and unregarded by
the whole-route-etx. The code tries to be modular enough to exchange
parts if desired, such as the udp-part by an olsr-plugin or the
screen-output in something that can be diplayed graphical e.g. by
olsr-viz. (gpl is gpl, be free to do so)

-  Download: https://downloads.open-mesh.org/fftrace/
